
header Vol. 10 No. 3, April 2005

Contents | Author index | Subject index | Search | Home

Intellectual property rights vs. public access rights: ethical aspects of the
DeCSS decryption program

Robert Vaagan Oslo University College Postboks 4 St. Olavs plass 0130 Oslo,
Norway	and	Wallace Koehler Valdosta State University 1500 N Patterson St.
Valdosta GA 31698, USA



Abstract Introduction. In 1999-2000, a Norwegian youth cracked a DVD-access
code and published a decryption program on the Internet. He was sued by the US
DVD Copy Control Association (DVD-CCA) and the Norwegian Motion Picture
Association (MAP), allies of the US Motion Picture Association of America
(MPAA), arrested by Norwegian police and charged with data crime. Two Norwegian
court rulings in 2003 unanimously ruled that the program did not amount to a
breach of Norwegian law, and he was fully acquitted. In the US, there have been
related cases, some with other outcomes. Method. Based on a theoretical
framework developed by Zwass, the paper discusses these court rulings and the
wider issues of intellectual property rights versus public access rights.
Analysis. The DVD-Jon case illustrates that intellectual property rights can
conflict with public access rights, as the struggle between proprietary
software and public domain software, as well as the SPARC and Open Archives
Initiative reflect. Results. An assessment of the DVD-Jon case based on the
Zwass framework does not give a clear information ethics answer. The analysis
depends on whether one ascribes to consequentialist (e.g., utilitarian) or
deontological reflection, and also which side of the digital gap is to be
accorded most weight. Conclusion. While copyright interests are being legally
strengthened, there may be ethically-grounded access rights that outweigh
property rights.

Introduction

The DVD-Jon case

From September 1999 to January 2000, a then fifteen-year old Norwegian hacker
('DVD-Jon'), acting with others, developed a data program that circumvented the
Content Scrambling protection on DVDs and made it possible to view the DVDs
with the open source Linux operating system. He then published his DeCSS
decryption program on his Website, allowing others to download and use it.
DeCSS removes the copy bar (CSS - Content Scrambling System) in DVDs and stores
a copy of the film on the hard disk. The copy bar is licensed by DVD Copy
Control Association Incorporated for the protection of DVD films produced by
Motion Pictures Association members. In January 2000 the plaintiffs, the US DVD
Copy Control Association (DVD-CCA) and the Norwegian Motion Picture Association
(MAP), allies of the US Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), filed
charges in Norway against the hacker. Yet, three years later, in January 2003,
he was fully acquitted of all charges in the Oslo municipal court. The ruling
was appealed to Borgarting appellate court, which in December 2003 upheld the
lower court ruling. Both rulings were unanimous. Both courts acknowledged that
DeCSS can be used for the production of pirate copies, but neither court found
it proven that this was the defendant's intent in developing the program.
Moreover, neither court found it proven that others had used the DeCSS program
on illegally procured DVD-films. The prosecution did not appeal to the
Norwegian Supreme Court. The rulings are seen as a clear victory for the open
source movement, and have elevated DVD-Jon from the ordinary hacker ranks of
white and black hats (Schell & Lodge 2002) into becoming a hero of the
Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Open Source Initiative.

In the USA, where the controversial Digital Millenium Copyright Act (DMCA) was
introduced in 1998 (Samuelson 2003; Lessig 2004: 156), there have been related
cases, some with other outcomes. The California Supreme Court in August 2003
(DVD Copy Control Association v. Bunner 2003) overruled previous lower court
decisions by ruling that stopping the publication of the DVD copy code DeCSS
does not conflict with the freedom of expression. The ruling was a triumph for
the DVD Copy Control Association (DVDCCA) which has sued dozens of Websites for
publishing DeCSS (Eschenfelder & Desai 2004).
...

As a first example, in United States v. Thomas, a US Appellate Court (1996)
held that a couple who operated a computer bulletin board system in California
could be successfully prosecuted in a federal court in Memphis, Tennessee. The
case depended upon the community standard for the definition of obscenity.
Community standards in western Tennessee were determined to differ from those
in California. Prosecutors determined that Tennessee would provide a better
venue than California.

Second and more on point for the DVD-Jon case was the decision to arrest and
prosecute Dmitry Sklyarov, a Russian scientist for code cracking under the
DCMA. His Russian employer, ElcomSoft was also charged. Sklyarov had developed
and published in Russia the program Advanced eBook Processor, which cracked
Adobe's eBook Reader. He was arrested in the United States as he was to address
the Defcon-9 conference in Las Vegas in 2001 (see U.S. v. ElcomSoft & Sklyarov
2002). In the end Sklyarov and ElcomSoft were found not guilty by the jury.

The Norwegian and California rulings are interesting both legally and ethically
and raise a host of questions. While the law is preoccupied with what is legal,
ethics is primarily concerned with legitimacy. Although the law and ethics
often go hand-in-hand, civil disobedience is a reminder that this is not always
the case. DVD-Jon argued throughout that he was defending a legitimate cause,
and the Norwegian court rulings served to back this interpretation. Do ethical
opinions differ as much as legal opinions on the DVD-Jon case? Can all kinds of
digital information and knowledge be considered intellectual property? Is there
a clear borderline between public domain and proprietary software? How can one
distinguish between the public's right to access and the ownership rights of
authors and producers with respect to intellectual property? Zwass (2003)
discusses information ethics issues in terms of four main domains: privacy,
accuracy, property and access. Clearly, the DVD-Jon case is about property, as
the California Supreme Court ruling shows, but the Norwegian court rulings (and
the rulings of lower courts in California) also suggest that access, and
freedom of expression, are at stake (Vaagan 2004).

Norwegian court rulings

The two Norwegian court rulings have been made available in English by
Electronic Frontier Norway, and, therefore, we quote only the abstracts:

Oslo Municipal Court on 7 January, 2003 reached the following verdict:

Criminal law. The penal code section 145 second paragraph cf third and fourth
paragraph. A nineteen-year old man was indicted for violation of the penal code
section 145 second paragraph cf third and fourth paragraph. He had developed a
computer program making it possible to view DVD movies without licensed playing
equipment. The court found first that access to movies legally purchased was
not unlawful with respect to the penal code section 145 second paragraph even
if the movies were viewed in a different way than presumed by the producer.
Second, the court found that disclosure of encryption keys by itself did not
constitute unauthorised access to data. The indicted could neither be convicted
for contributory crime to the possible unauthorised access by others to DVD
moves because the program also had a legal application. Borgarting appellate
court on 22 December, 2003 upheld the lower court ruling:

A young person had in 1999 with others co-operated to the development of a
program that circumvented Content Scrambling System for DVDs, and posted this
on the Net. He had programmed a user interface which made the program available
also for persons without any special knowledge of information technology. The
appellate court found, as the first instance court, that the development of the
program was not illegal. The action was not found to be an infringement of the
provisions of the copyright act. Therefore, access could not be qualified as
'unauthorised' according to the criminal code sect. 145, second paragraph. The
appeal of Økokrim was therefore rejected. As stated, the prosecution did not
appeal to the Norwegian Supreme Court, so the last ruling is seen as a
resounding legal victory for the defendant. Norwegian consumer groups like
Electronic Frontier Norway were delighted. Having been ethically convinced
throughout of the legitimacy of their cause, they now have legal backing—at
least in Norway. DVD-Jon and like-minded spirits, encouraged by the rulings,
see themselves, and are seen, as crusaders of the open source movement. They
view software as a common good to be shared, not to be sold for profit. In
Norwegian librarianship, where free access to information is the overall most
frequently quoted professional value (Vaagan & Holm 2004), the verdicts are
welcome. In late 2003 DVD-Jon also cracked a copy bar on the Apple iTunes Music
Store, allowing users to play barred music files in the ACC-format in Linux.
This was refined into a program called PlayFair, causing Apple to take legal
action against Websites and servers using the program. In April 2004,
encouraged by the rulings, he published on his Website a new version of the
same program called DeDRMS. Hackers and proprietary software developers are
spurring each other on, in a spiral of technological creativity. In this sense
at least, they are useful to one another.

The USA

Could DVD-Jon be tried in the United States? The United States represents the
largest market for, and the largest producer of, intellectual property in the
world. The United States has also manifested a willingness to extend its
competence beyond state and national boundaries to enforce its intellectual
property jurisprudence interpretation into other jurisdictions (Lessig 2004).

As a first example, in United States v. Thomas (1996), the courts held that a
couple who operated a computer bulletin board system in California could be
successfully prosecuted in a federal court in Memphis, Tennessee. The case
depended upon the community standard for the definition of obscenity. Community
standards in western Tennessee were determined to differ from those in
California. Prosecutors determined that Tennessee would provide a better venue
than California.

Second, and more pertinent to the DVD-Jon case, was the decision to arrest and
prosecute the Russian scientist Dmitry Sklyarov for code cracking in violation
of the DCMA. His Russian employer, ElcomSoft was also charged. Sklyarov had
developed and published in Russia the program Advanced eBook Processor that
cracked Adobe's eBook Reader. He was arrested in the United States as he was to
address the Defcon-9 conference in Las Vegas in 2001 (see United States v.
ElcomSoft 2002). In the end Sklyarov and ElcomSoft were found not guilty by the
jury.

Under existing USA law, DVD-Jon might suffer the same fate as did Sklyarov.
Were he to have entered USA jurisdiction, he might have been arrested and
prosecuted. Would he have received the same finding as in United States v.
ElcomSoft is problematic and speculative.

Theoretical considerations

Ethics and the law

As stated, the law and ethics sometimes come up with different views. As Frické
et al. (2000: 470) point out in their analysis of the ethical basis of the
Library Bill of Rights, laws can be unethical or wrong: slavery in America and
the Holocaust in Nazi-Germany are two examples. Today many would also include
in this category religious laws such as Islamic sharia law. Abortion or
embryo-based research are legally and ethically divisive issues in many
countries.

The intellectual property rights of software developers, in most cases, do not
conflict with public access rights. The protection of intellectual property
through ordinary patents or trademarks can even be conceived as a social
contract under which society protects the owners' rights while products are
marketed to the public at a price. Sometimes patents or trademarks are viewed
as insufficient and are reinforced by supplementary protective measures such as
copy bars. Yet this price and/or the supplementary measures can be interpreted
as unethical. The World Trade Organization TRIPS agreement (trade-related
aspects of intellectual property rights) as late as August 2003 (some twenty
years after AIDS first appeared) apparently resolved the long-standing deadlock
over intellectual property protection and public health. Governments finally
agreed on legal changes to facilitate poorer countries' import of cheaper
generics made under compulsory licensing if they are unable to manufacture the
medicines themselves. Many see, for example, article 27.3b of the WTO/TRIPS
agreement (1994) which deals with patentability or non-patentability of plant
and animal inventions, and the protection of plant varieties, as profoundly
unjust and unethical. Lessig (2004), inspired by Richard Stallman and the Free
Software Foundation, argues that most of the media industry has developed
historically thanks to piracy, and that big media exploit technology and the
law to lock down culture and control creativity. In our context we will
concentrate on the following issue: How can one ethically distinguish between
the public's right to access and the ownership rights of authors and producers
with respect to intellectual property?

Information ethics

Four main ethical issues with respect to information systems are often focussed
on: privacy, accuracy, property and access. These four issues can in turn be
traced back to three main sources: 1) the pervasive role and capacity of
systems for collecting, storing and retrieving information, 2) information
technology complexity and 3) the intangible nature of information and digital
goods, such as digitized music or software (Zwass 2003: 1056):

    fig1

    Figure 1: Ethical issues, sources and individual rights (adapted from Zwass
    2003: 1056 In this framework, the DVD-Jon case clearly involves the ethical
    issues of property and access, linked with the corresponding individual
    rights of private property and fair treatment. Translated to a courtroom
    setting, where, as in this case, we have a plaintiff versus a defendant, we
    need to clarify whose private property and fair treatment of whom.

            Before proceeding it should be added that concentrating on property
            and access does not mean that the other two ethical issues of
            privacy and accuracy, linked with the rights of privacy and free
            consent as well as with due process, are not important or cannot be
            related to the DVD-Jon case. As discussed elsewhere (Vaagan 2004),
            the debate surrounding the Total Awareness Act and the differences
            between privacy standards in the USA and Europe show that these two
            ethical issues are among the most controversial electronic
            information age issues following September 11, 2001. Privacy and
            accuracy, to some extent at least, can also be related to the case
            at hand; for example, if one views the production and dissemination
            of pirate copies as part of freedom of expression, or if one argues
            as Lessig (2004) does, that free culture and consumer interests in
            the USA are being suppressed by strong, protectionist big-business
            media interests interacting with the US government and are
            resulting in laws like the DMCA.

            Property

            The World Intellectual Property Organization solicits studies in an
            expanding field of activities ranging from the Internet, health
            care, all aspects of science and technology, literature and the
            arts, patent systems and access to drug care, genetic resources,
            traditional knowledge and folklore. Intellectual property such as
            licensed software is clearly protected by several legal mechanisms
            such as patents, copyright (among the most important forms of
            intellectual property) or trade secrets. Faced by digital piracy
            and illicit copying, proprietary software producers in addition
            frequently restrict or limit use, for example, by anti-copying
            measures such as copy bars.

            Some do not accept restrictions on the free utilization of
            intellectual property, e.g., in countries where piracy is openly
            justified or covertly condoned, sometimes arguing that poverty
            prevents their paying high prices for imported materials, or even
            that it represents redress for colonial exploitation (Marrett
            2003). In the words of Lessig (2004: 64), 'The physics of piracy of
            the intangible are different from the physics of the tangible'. Are
            they in the wrong, ethically speaking? This is a very fundamental
            point but is beyond our present scope. It serves to illustrate,
            however, that there are a number of unresolved problems in the
            borderlands of law and ethics. In the following we will concentrate
            ethical reflections with regard to legally procured and licit
            material such as open archives and open source material.

            The difficult balancing of these interests is well reflected in the
            reactions by many consumer groups to the new European Union
            Directive for the Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights
            (2004), (IPR Directive) which became EU law in April 2004. The
            protests from consumer groups such as the Irish Free Software
            Organization pointed to the directive's alleged extreme provisions
            and harsh treatment of ordinary consumers for even non-commercial
            or accidental infringements. The IPR Directive means that the
            reverse engineering of software products in order to produce
            competing, compatible products would be subject to sanctions. It is
            feared that this would greatly affect the free software movement
            and the growing use of open source software.

            Access

            Access may be interpreted restrictively to refer only to the open
            versus closed access of users to library materials. Here the trend
            has been from closed to open access almost everywhere except in
            archival and research collections (see below) or the library
            systems of totalitarian states (Feather & Sturges 2003: 468). Yet,
            in the context of information ethics, access has a far wider
            application than libraries. Internationally, the digital divide
            among and within, countries is probably the most obvious aspect of
            the access issue. Some see the digital divide as one of the most
            serious ethical problems internationally in the information age
            (Vaagan 2002: 1).

            Factors that influence the digital divide are socio-economic status
            (income, education), gender, life stage and geography. The Computer
            Industry Almanac estimates that the worldwide number of Internet
            users will top one billion in mid-2005, and reports that at the end
            of 2004, as few as fifteen countries accounted for 71% of the
            global Internet user population. The USA alone accounted for 185
            million Internet users while the countries next on the list are as
            follows: China (99), Japan (78), Germany (41), India (37), UK (33),
            South Korea (32), Italy (25.5), France (25.5), Brazil (22), Russia
            (21), Canada (20), Mexico (13), Spain (13) Australia (13). There is
            little Internet user growth in developed countries, and over the
            next five-year period many users will switch to high-speed
            broadband connections and supplement Internet use with Smartphone
            and mobile Internet devices. In developing countries, especially
            China, there is considerable growth potential for Internet use
            (Computer Industry Almanac 2005). Yet the digital gap exists not
            only among but also within countries: in relation to the population
            base within each country, a former study had shown that within the
            European Union, the countries with the highest and lowest
            proportions of online users were Sweden (68%, September 2002) and
            Lithuania (8%, October 2001) (NUA Internet Surveys 2005).

            A specific aspect of access noted above which particularly worries
            the academic and research community is access to electronic
            journals. Initiatives like the Scholarly Publishing and Academic
            Resources Coalition (SPARC) and The Open Archives Initiative
            reflect the academic community's concern with growing restrictions
            to access. Strained library budgets and the spiralling costs of
            electronic journals restrict access and may contribute to the
            digital divide. Currently the Directory of Open Access Journals
            numbers only some 1400 journals, which is modest compared to the
            Thomson group's approximately 8,000 journals indexed by the Web of
            Science.

    Related to this is the struggle between proprietary and public domain
    software, illustrated, for example, by the Microsoft-Linux competition. The
    California Performance Review envisages cost-cutting measures of thirty-two
    billion US dollars over the next five years, partly by switching from
    proprietary software and traditional telephone systems to open-source
    software and voice over Internet Protocol telephony (Lemos 2004). Also in
    Norway we see this development. The second-largest city, Bergen, as a
    cost-saving measure, has recently switched from Microsoft to Linux.
    Norway's largest daily Aftenposten reported on 15 June, 2004 that this
    affects the city's 15,000 administrative staff, 35,000 school pupils and
    almost 100 schools. The appeal of freeware, public domain software is
    obvious to poorer countries. To meet this challenge Microsoft is
    differentiating its pricing and marketing strategy and offering a cheap
    version of Windows XP in Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia. As may be
    expected, market share estimates vary considerably (Petreley 2003), as do
    future prospects.

    Ownership of, versus public access to, intellectual property

    There are several different philosophical approaches to perspectives on
    ethics and information ethics. On the one hand, information ethics is
    described in metaphysical, abstract terms. Floridi (2004) and Capurro
    (2000) address computer science and ethics and information ethics
    respectively in terms of underlying ontologies. It is sometimes described
    in more specific terms. Smith (2000) would describe information ethics as
    applied ethics with both broad and specific applications. Koehler et al.
    (2000) and Koehler and Pemberton (2000) have sought to identify the sources
    of and practices of information ethics by examining actual practice as
    reported by information professionals or as documented in professional
    codes of ethics.

    Froehlich (2003) distinguishes between two main perspectives on information
    ethics. Whereas the first treats ethics both as a descriptive and
    emancipatory theory, the second views ethics either as a metadiscipline or
    as a kind of applied domain. Particularly as a descriptive theory where it
    analyses the power structures of different societies and traditions, and as
    an emancipatory theory where it is contrasted with established moral and
    legal customs, norms and practices, information ethics is a potent tool to
    assess the implications of the DVD-Jon case.

    Zwass (2003) distinguishes between consequentialist (e.g., utilitarian) and
    deontological reflection. Consequentialist ethical thought advocates that
    one selects the action with the best possible consequences. Utilitarian
    theory holds that our chosen action must produce the greatest overall good
    for the maximum number of people. On a capita basis and seen against the
    background of the digital divide among nations, it would seem that
    crusaders like DVD-Jon and the open source movement are ethically justified
    from a utilitarian perspective. By contrast, utilitarian theory would argue
    that the interests of the minority of proprietary software developers and
    vendors must be sacrificed for the larger good of public access. But from
    another ethical standpoint, deontological ethical theory argues that we
    must do what is right. Our actions are models of behaviour, and we must act
    as such. The problem is that both DVD-Jon and Bill Gates could argue in
    this way.

    The open archives and open source movements are consistent with the IFLA
    core value of free access to information, which are fully subscribed to by
    most professional library associations. Yet as has been argued elsewhere
    (Vaagan 2004), free access to information and the freedom of expression are
    ideals which under certain conditions, e.g., emergencies or war, can be
    legally proscribed even in democratic societies. Zwass (2003) argues that
    major individual rights in democratic societies are the right to life and
    safety, the right of free consent, right to private property, right of free
    speech and fair treatment. Much here depends on who we claim these rights
    for. If these are those on the other side of the digital divide—the vast
    majority of the world's present population of 6.4 billion—who are still not
    online, it would seem that both consequentialist-utilitarian and
    deontological ethical theory condone the open archives and open source
    movement.

    Conclusion

    How are we to assess ethically those situations where intellectual property
    rights conflict with public access rights with regard to digital products
    such as in the DVD-Jon case? As we have seen the legal system provides
    different answers, and is influenced by national legislation, treaties and
    customs. Also from an ethical point of view, assessments vary, depending on
    consequentialist (utilitarian) and deontological perspectives and not the
    least on which side of the digital divide one identifies with (Lester and
    Koehler 2003: Chapter 11).

    The DVD-Jon case, as well as other prominent and related cases, represent
    the nexus between ethics and more specifically information ethics and law.
    Consider hacking. It was once thought of as a sort of romantic quixotic
    pursuit (Levy 1984; Sterling 1992), but no longer. We can differentiate
    between benign and malicious hackers (Parker 1998: 160-61). A benign hacker
    is a hobbyist, engaged in penetrating other people's computers and computer
    systems for the sport of it. The malicious hacker penetrates those systems
    for nefarious or criminal intent. Is benign hacking the realm of
    information ethics while malicious hacking falls within the jurisdiction of
    the law? Who decides whether a given instance is benign or malicious? Are
    activities that are initiated in one country actionable in another?

    The threat to information systems and our resultant vulnerabilities have
    become the subject of academic and popular literature (e.g., Yourdon 2000).
    How do societies protect themselves in light of these threats, real or
    perceived? One answer is to build more complex systems to respond to those
    threats or to mitigate or shift the risks. Some of these responses are
    essentially technological in nature, others are social. For example,
    companies or governments can seek to erect impenetrable firewalls around
    their ICT systems—a technical response. Governments can legislate draconian
    punishments for those who engage in information crimes—a social response.
    Professional organizations and educational institutions can inculcate a
    sense of legitimate practice and ethics—an institutional response. We have
    also witnessed a shift in the way intellectual property is provided in the
    marketplace, in part to protect the economic interests of the owners of
    copyright. Anyone acquiring software buys a license to use that software
    rather than its outright purchase. The relationship between user and
    supplier and their respective rights is changing.

    In the end, we may come down to a conflict among values. To repeat a phrase
    from the introduction:

    Clearly, the DVD-Jon case is about property, as the California Supreme
    Court ruling shows, but the Norwegian court rulings (and the rulings of
    lower courts in California) also suggest that access, and freedom of
    expression, are at stake ( Vaagan 2004). Where there are conflicts between
    property on the one hand and access and freedom of expression on the other,
    ethical and legal considerations must be weighed. As shown by Lessig
    (2004), how we define property, access, and freedom of expression have
    cultural, political, legal, professional, and technical determinants. As
    any of the underlying determinants change, inevitably how we interpret
    legal and ethical precepts must necessarily change as well. To square this
    with a deontological approach, one may argue that the performance of right
    can be changed as what is defined as what is right is changed. Similarly,
    the utilitarianist might recognize that the most good for the greater
    population also may undergo redefinition.

    None of this answers the fundamental questions raised by the DVD-Jon case.
    We do recognize that in law the rights of the copyright holder are being
    reinforced. At the same time, there is a growing recognition that there may
    be access rights that supersede property rights. It remains to be seen to
    what extent this growing recognition in a globalized economy will affect
    copyright holder rights.

    Acknowledgements

    The authors wish to acknowledge the contributions and suggestions of the
    anonymous referees

    References

    Capurro, R. (2000). Ethical challenges of the information society in the
    21st century. International Information & Library Review, 32(3/4), 257-276.
    Computer Industry Almanac. Retrieved 8 January, 2005 from
    http://www.c-i-a.com/ DVD Copy Control Association v. Bunner, S102588,
    2003. Retrieved 24 August, 2004 from
    http://news.findlaw.com/hdocs/docs/dvd/dvdccabnnr82503opn.pdf Electronic
    Frontier Foundation. (n.d.). Norway v. Johansen case - criminal charges for
    accessing own DVD. Retrieved 8 January, 2005 from
    http://www.eff.org/IP/Video/Johansen_DeCSS_case/ Electronic Frontier
    Norway. The Norwegian DVD-case - Decision by Borgarting Appellate Court.
    Retrieved 8 January, 2005 from http://efn.no/DVD-dom-20031222-en.html
    Eschenfelder, K.R. & Desai, A.C. (2004). Software as protest: the
    unexpected resiliency of U.S. based DeCSS posting and linking. The
    Information Society, 11, 2. European Union. (2004, April 30). Directive
    2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April, 2004
    on the enforcement of intellectual property rights. Official Journal of the
    European Union, L157, 45-86. Retrieved 8 January, 2005 from
    http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/2004/l_195/l_19520040602en00160025.pdf
    Feather, J. & Sturges, P. (Eds.). (2003). Open source. In International
    encyclopedia of information and library science (2nd ed.) (p. 468). London:
    Routledge. Floridi, L. (2004). Outline of a theory of strongly semantic
    information. Minds and Machines, 14(2), 197-222. Frické, M., Mathiesen, K.
    & Fallis, D. (2000). The ethical presuppositions behind the library bill of
    rights, The Library Quarterly, 70(4), 468-491. Froehlich, T.J. (2003).
    Information ethics. In J. Feather & P. Sturges (Eds.), International
    encyclopedia of information and library science (2nd ed.) (pp. 256-258).
    London: Routledge Koehler, W., Hurych, J., Dole, W., & Wall, J. (2000).
    Ethical values of information and library professionals - an expanded
    analysis. International Information & Library Review, 32(3/4), 485-506.
    Koehler, W. and Pemberton, J.M. (2000). A search for core values: towards a
    model code of ethics for information professionals. Journal of Information
    Ethics, 9(1), 26-54. Lemos, R. (2004, August 13). California urged to use
    open-source, VoIP. ZDNet. Retrieved 5 March, 2005 from
    http://news.zdnet.com/2100-3513_22-5309476.html Lessig, L. (2004). Free
    culture: how big media uses technology and the law to lock down culture and
    control creativity. New York, NY: Penguin Press. Retrieved 8 January, 2005
    from http://www-bib.hive.no/tekster/ekstern/lessig/freeculture.pdf Lester,
    J. and Koehler, W.C. (2003). Fundamentals of information studies:
    understanding information and its environment. New York, NY: Neal-Schuman.
    Levy, S. (1984). Hackers: heroes of the computer revolution. New York, NY:
    Anchor/Doubleday. Marrett, P. (2003) Intellectual property. In
    International encyclopedia of information and library science (2nd ed.)
    (pp. 322-323). London: Routledge. NUA Internet Surveys. (2005) How many
    online in Europe 2005. Retrieved 8 January, 2005 from
    http://www.nua.ie/surveys/how_many_online/europe.html Parker, D.B. (1998).
    Fighting computer crime: a new framework for protecting information. New
    York, NY: Wiley. Petreley, N. (2003, March 14). Debunking the Linux-Windows
    market-share myth. Linux World. Retrieved 10 January 2005 from
    http://www.linuxworld.com/story/32648.htm Samuelson, P. (2003). DRM {and,
    or, vs} the law. Communications of the ACM, 46(4), 41-45 [A version of this
    paper was retrieved 5 March, 2005 from
    http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~pam/papers/acm on drm.pdf] Schell, B.H. &
    Lodge, J. L. (2002). The hacking of America: who's doing it, why and more.
    Westport, CT: Quorom Smith, M. (2001). Information ethics. In F.C.Lynden
    (Ed.), Advances in Librarianship vol. 25 (pp. 29-66). San Diego, CA:
    Academic Press. Sterling, B. (1992). The hacker crackdown: law and disorder
    on the electronic frontier. New York, NY: Bantam. United States v.
    ElcomSoft & Sklyarov, 203 F.Supp.2d 1111 (N.D. Cal. 2002). United States v.
    Thomas, 74 F.3d 701 (6th Cir. 1996), cert. denied, 519 U.S. 820 (1996)
    Vaagan, R. (Ed.). (2002). The ethics of librarianship: an international
    survey. Munich: International Federation of Library Associations and
    K.G.Saur Verlag. (IFLA Publications No. 101) Vaagan, R. (2004). Ethical
    issues raised by the electronic information environment. Proceedings of the
    annual conference of the Library Association of Ireland and the Chartered
    Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP) Ireland (in
    press in An Leabharlann) Vaagan, R. and Holm, S. (2004). Professional
    values in Norwegian librarianship. New Library World, 105(1200/1201),
    213-217. World Trade Organization. (1994). Trade-related aspects of
    intellectual property rights. Geneva: World Trade Organization. Retrieved 8
    January, 2005 from
    http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/27-trips_01_e.htm Yourdon, E.
    (2002). Byte wars: the impact of September 11 on information technology.
    Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Zwass, V. (2003). Ethical issues in
    information systems. In Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science
    (2nd ed.) vol. 2. (pp. 1054-1062). New York, NY: Marcel Dekker.


    Find other papers on this subject.


    How to cite this paper:

    Vaagan, R. & Koehler, W. (2005). "Intellectual property rights vs. public
    access rights: ethical aspects of the DeCSS decryptation program."
    Information Research, 10(3) paper 230 [Available at
    http://InformationR.net/ir/10-3/paper230.html]

    Check for citations, using Google Scholar counter Web Counter © the author,
    2005. Last updated: 9 April, 2005 Valid XHTML 1.0! Contents | Author index
    | Subject index | Search | Home

